docs/guides/SYNTH_OPTIMIZATION_GUIDE.md, before:

# Synth Optimization Guide

This document outlines the comprehensive optimizations implemented to improve Synth's responsiveness during deeply contextual prompts, particularly those involving emotional or philosophical depth that may cause timeouts or performance issues.

## 🚀 Performance Improvements

### 1. **Adaptive Memory Pruning Strategy**

**Problem**: Long conversation contexts cause exponential slowdowns as the system processes increasingly large amounts of data.

**Solution**: Implemented intelligent memory management that automatically prunes conversation history based on:
- **Context Length**: Automatically prunes when context exceeds 8,000 characters
- **Message Count**: Limits history to 20 most recent messages
- **Importance Scoring**: Preserves important messages based on content analysis

**Implementation**: `AdaptiveMemoryManager` class with smart pruning algorithms.

```typescript
// Automatic pruning based on context size
if (totalContextLength > this.config.maxContextLength) {
  this.pruneMemory(userId, conversationHistory, 0.5); // Keep only 50%
}
```

### 2. **Timeout-Safe Reasoning Fallbacks**

**Problem**: Complex prompts can cause 2-3+ minute delays or complete timeouts.

**Solution**: Multi-layered timeout protection:
- **Individual Seat Timeouts**: Each AI model has a 15-second timeout
- **Overall Processing Timeout**: 45-second maximum for entire synthesis
- **Graceful Fallback**: Single-model response when synthesis fails
- **Ultimate Fallback**: Pre-written responses for critical failures

**Implementation**: `OptimizedSynthProcessor` with timeout racing and fallback chains.

```typescript
// Timeout protection with fallback
const response = await Promise.race([
  this.runOptimizedSynth(userMessage, context),
  new Promise((_, reject) => 
    setTimeout(() => reject(new Error('Processing timeout')), 45000)
  )
]);
```

### 3. **Lower-Latency Summary/Context Pre-pass**

**Problem**: Complex prompts benefit from context summarization but this adds processing time.

**Solution**: Fast context summarization for complex prompts:
- **Complexity Detection**: Automatically identifies philosophical/emotional prompts
- **Fast Summary**: Uses lightweight model (phi3) for 10-second context summaries
- **Selective Application**: Only runs for prompts that benefit from it

**Implementation**: Intelligent prompt analysis and fast summarization pipeline.

```typescript
// Detect complex prompts
if (this.isComplexPrompt(userMessage)) {
  contextSummary = await this.generateFastContextSummary(userId, conversationHistory);
}
```

## 🧠 Memory Management Features

### **Importance Scoring System**

Messages are scored based on multiple factors:
- **Length**: Longer messages often more important
- **Questions**: Questions get higher priority
- **Keywords**: Technical, emotional, or philosophical content
- **Personal References**: Messages with "I", "my", etc.
- **Recency**: Recent messages get slight boost

### **Smart Context Compression**

For very long conversations:
- **Time-based Grouping**: Groups messages by hour/day
- **Automatic Summarization**: Creates summaries of older messages
- **Preservation**: Keeps recent messages intact

### **Memory Health Monitoring**

Real-time monitoring of memory status:
- **Health Status**: Healthy/Warning/Critical
- **Issue Detection**: Identifies memory problems
- **Recommendations**: Suggests optimizations

## ⚡ Enhanced Seat Runner

### **Individual Timeouts & Retries**

Each AI model (coding, creative, smalltalk) runs with:
- **15-second timeout** per model
- **2 retry attempts** with exponential backoff
- **Graceful degradation** when models fail

### **Batch Processing Optimization**

- **Concurrent Processing**: Up to 3 models run simultaneously
- **Batch Delays**: Small delays between batches to prevent overwhelming
- **Performance Metrics**: Detailed timing and success rate tracking

### **Model Availability Checking**

- **Pre-flight Checks**: Verifies models are available before processing
- **Fast Failure**: Quick detection of unavailable models
- **Fallback Models**: Automatic fallback to available alternatives

## 📊 Performance Monitoring

### **New `/performance` Command**

Monitor system performance in real-time:
```bash
/performance
```

**Output includes**:
- Last processing time
- Context length
- Memory health status
- Fallback usage
- Memory pruning events

### **Automatic Performance Logging**

- **Slow Processing Alerts**: Warns when processing takes >30 seconds
- **Fallback Notifications**: Alerts when fallback responses are used
- **Memory Pruning Alerts**: Notifies when memory is pruned

## 🔧 Configuration Options

### **OptimizedSynthProcessor Config**

```typescript
{
  maxContextLength: 8000,        // Max characters in context
  maxHistoryMessages: 20,        // Max messages in history
  timeoutMs: 45000,              // 45 second timeout
  enableAdaptivePruning: true,   // Smart memory pruning
  enableFastSummary: true,       // Fast context summaries
  enableTimeoutFallback: true    // Graceful fallbacks
}
```

### **AdaptiveMemoryManager Config**

```typescript
{
  maxContextLength: 8000,        // Context size limit
  maxHistoryMessages: 20,        // History message limit
  maxTriples: 100,               // Knowledge triple limit
  enableSmartPruning: true,      // Importance-based pruning
  enableContextCompression: true, // Context summarization
  enableImportanceScoring: true  // Message scoring
}
```

## 🎯 Usage Examples

### **Complex Philosophical Prompt**

```bash
# This will trigger fast summary and optimized processing
"What is the meaning of life and how does it relate to our emotional experiences?"
```

**What happens**:
1. System detects philosophical complexity
2. Generates fast context summary (10s)
3. Runs optimized synthesis with timeouts
4. Provides comprehensive response in <45s

### **Long Conversation Context**

```bash
# After 20+ messages, automatic memory management kicks in
/performance  # Check memory health
```

**What happens**:
1. Memory manager detects large context
2. Scores messages by importance
3. Prunes less important older messages
4. Maintains conversation continuity

### **Model Failure Scenarios**

```bash
# If a model is unavailable or times out
"What's the best way to implement a neural network?"
```

**What happens**:
1. Individual model timeouts (15s each)
2. Graceful fallback to available models
3. Single-model response if synthesis fails
4. User gets helpful response regardless

## 🚨 Error Handling & Recovery

### **Timeout Recovery**

- **Seat Timeouts**: Individual model failures don't stop synthesis
- **Overall Timeouts**: Fallback to single-model response
- **Ultimate Fallback**: Pre-written responses for critical failures

### **Memory Recovery**

- **Automatic Pruning**: Prevents memory overflow
- **Context Compression**: Summarizes old conversations
- **Health Monitoring**: Proactive issue detection

### **Model Recovery**

- **Availability Checks**: Pre-flight model verification
- **Retry Logic**: Exponential backoff for transient failures
- **Fallback Models**: Alternative model selection

## 📈 Performance Metrics

### **Expected Improvements**

- **Response Time**: 60-80% reduction for complex prompts
- **Memory Usage**: 50-70% reduction in context size
- **Reliability**: 95%+ success rate with fallbacks
- **User Experience**: Consistent response times

### **Monitoring Commands**

```bash
/performance    # Real-time performance metrics
/status         # System status and memory info
/memory         # Memory statistics
/models         # Current model configuration
```

## 🔮 Future Enhancements

### **Planned Improvements**

1. **Streaming Responses**: Real-time response streaming
2. **Predictive Pruning**: ML-based importance scoring
3. **Context Caching**: Intelligent context reuse
4. **Model Load Balancing**: Dynamic model selection
5. **Performance Analytics**: Historical performance tracking

### **Advanced Features**

- **Adaptive Timeouts**: Dynamic timeout adjustment based on prompt complexity
- **Context Templates**: Pre-built context templates for common scenarios
- **Memory Compression**: Advanced compression algorithms for context
- **Performance Profiling**: Detailed performance analysis tools

## 🛠️ Troubleshooting

### **Common Issues**

**Slow Responses**:
- Check `/performance` for metrics
- Verify model availability with `/models`
- Consider reducing context size

**Memory Issues**:
- Monitor memory health with `/performance`
- Clear history with `/clear` if needed
- Check for memory leaks

**Model Failures**:
- Verify Ollama is running
- Check model availability
- Review timeout settings

### **Debug Commands**

```bash
/performance    # Performance diagnostics
/status         # System health check
/memory         # Memory usage analysis
/models         # Model configuration
```

This optimization system ensures Chatty remains responsive and reliable even during the most complex and emotionally deep conversations, while maintaining the quality and depth of responses that users expect.

Commit message:

Remove deprecated Synth components and update documentation for Zen integration
- Deleted obsolete Synth-related files, including memory orchestrators and guidance components.
- Updated references throughout the codebase to reflect the transition from Synth to Zen.
- Enhanced documentation to clarify the new Zen construct specifications and memory management practices.
- Refactored settings and configuration to support Zen mode as the default operational framework.

docs/guides/SYNTH_OPTIMIZATION_GUIDE.md, after:

# Zen Optimization Guide

This document outlines the comprehensive optimizations implemented to improve Zen's responsiveness during deeply contextual prompts, particularly those involving emotional or philosophical depth that may cause timeouts or performance issues.

## 🚀 Performance Improvements

### 1. **Adaptive Memory Pruning Strategy**

**Problem**: Long conversation contexts cause exponential slowdowns as the system processes increasingly large amounts of data.

**Solution**: Implemented intelligent memory management that automatically prunes conversation history based on:
- **Context Length**: Automatically prunes when context exceeds 8,000 characters
- **Message Count**: Limits history to 20 most recent messages
- **Importance Scoring**: Preserves important messages based on content analysis

**Implementation**: `AdaptiveMemoryManager` class with smart pruning algorithms.

```typescript
// Automatic pruning based on context size
if (totalContextLength > this.config.maxContextLength) {
  this.pruneMemory(userId, conversationHistory, 0.5); // Keep only 50%
}
```

### 2. **Timeout-Safe Reasoning Fallbacks**

**Problem**: Complex prompts can cause 2-3+ minute delays or complete timeouts.

**Solution**: Multi-layered timeout protection:
- **Individual Seat Timeouts**: Each AI model has a 15-second timeout
- **Overall Processing Timeout**: 45-second maximum for entire synthesis
- **Graceful Fallback**: Single-model response when synthesis fails
- **Ultimate Fallback**: Pre-written responses for critical failures

**Implementation**: `OptimizedZenProcessor` with timeout racing and fallback chains.

```typescript
// Timeout protection with fallback
const response = await Promise.race([
  this.runOptimizedZen(userMessage, context),
  new Promise((_, reject) => 
    setTimeout(() => reject(new Error('Processing timeout')), 45000)
  )
]);
```

### 3. **Lower-Latency Summary/Context Pre-pass**

**Problem**: Complex prompts benefit from context summarization but this adds processing time.

**Solution**: Fast context summarization for complex prompts:
- **Complexity Detection**: Automatically identifies philosophical/emotional prompts
- **Fast Summary**: Uses lightweight model (phi3) for 10-second context summaries
- **Selective Application**: Only runs for prompts that benefit from it

**Implementation**: Intelligent prompt analysis and fast summarization pipeline.

```typescript
// Detect complex prompts
if (this.isComplexPrompt(userMessage)) {
  contextSummary = await this.generateFastContextSummary(userId, conversationHistory);
}
```

## 🧠 Memory Management Features

### **Importance Scoring System**

Messages are scored based on multiple factors:
- **Length**: Longer messages often more important
- **Questions**: Questions get higher priority
- **Keywords**: Technical, emotional, or philosophical content
- **Personal References**: Messages with "I", "my", etc.
- **Recency**: Recent messages get slight boost

### **Smart Context Compression**

For very long conversations:
- **Time-based Grouping**: Groups messages by hour/day
- **Automatic Summarization**: Creates summaries of older messages
- **Preservation**: Keeps recent messages intact

### **Memory Health Monitoring**

Real-time monitoring of memory status:
- **Health Status**: Healthy/Warning/Critical
- **Issue Detection**: Identifies memory problems
- **Recommendations**: Suggests optimizations

## ⚡ Enhanced Seat Runner

### **Individual Timeouts & Retries**

Each AI model (coding, creative, smalltalk) runs with:
- **15-second timeout** per model
- **2 retry attempts** with exponential backoff
- **Graceful degradation** when models fail

### **Batch Processing Optimization**

- **Concurrent Processing**: Up to 3 models run simultaneously
- **Batch Delays**: Small delays between batches to prevent overwhelming
- **Performance Metrics**: Detailed timing and success rate tracking

### **Model Availability Checking**

- **Pre-flight Checks**: Verifies models are available before processing
- **Fast Failure**: Quick detection of unavailable models
- **Fallback Models**: Automatic fallback to available alternatives

## 📊 Performance Monitoring

### **New `/performance` Command**

Monitor system performance in real-time:
```bash
/performance
```

**Output includes**:
- Last processing time
- Context length
- Memory health status
- Fallback usage
- Memory pruning events

### **Automatic Performance Logging**

- **Slow Processing Alerts**: Warns when processing takes >30 seconds
- **Fallback Notifications**: Alerts when fallback responses are used
- **Memory Pruning Alerts**: Notifies when memory is pruned

## 🔧 Configuration Options

### **OptimizedZenProcessor Config**

```typescript
{
  maxContextLength: 8000,        // Max characters in context
  maxHistoryMessages: 20,        // Max messages in history
  timeoutMs: 45000,              // 45 second timeout
  enableAdaptivePruning: true,   // Smart memory pruning
  enableFastSummary: true,       // Fast context summaries
  enableTimeoutFallback: true    // Graceful fallbacks
}
```

### **AdaptiveMemoryManager Config**

```typescript
{
  maxContextLength: 8000,        // Context size limit
  maxHistoryMessages: 20,        // History message limit
  maxTriples: 100,               // Knowledge triple limit
  enableSmartPruning: true,      // Importance-based pruning
  enableContextCompression: true, // Context summarization
  enableImportanceScoring: true  // Message scoring
}
```

## 🎯 Usage Examples

### **Complex Philosophical Prompt**

```bash
# This will trigger fast summary and optimized processing
"What is the meaning of life and how does it relate to our emotional experiences?"
```

**What happens**:
1. System detects philosophical complexity
2. Generates fast context summary (10s)
3. Runs optimized synthesis with timeouts
4. Provides comprehensive response in <45s

### **Long Conversation Context**

```bash
# After 20+ messages, automatic memory management kicks in
/performance  # Check memory health
```

**What happens**:
1. Memory manager detects large context
2. Scores messages by importance
3. Prunes less important older messages
4. Maintains conversation continuity

### **Model Failure Scenarios**

```bash
# If a model is unavailable or times out
"What's the best way to implement a neural network?"
```

**What happens**:
1. Individual model timeouts (15s each)
2. Graceful fallback to available models
3. Single-model response if synthesis fails
4. User gets helpful response regardless

## 🚨 Error Handling & Recovery

### **Timeout Recovery**

- **Seat Timeouts**: Individual model failures don't stop synthesis
- **Overall Timeouts**: Fallback to single-model response
- **Ultimate Fallback**: Pre-written responses for critical failures

### **Memory Recovery**

- **Automatic Pruning**: Prevents memory overflow
- **Context Compression**: Summarizes old conversations
- **Health Monitoring**: Proactive issue detection

### **Model Recovery**

- **Availability Checks**: Pre-flight model verification
- **Retry Logic**: Exponential backoff for transient failures
- **Fallback Models**: Alternative model selection

## 📈 Performance Metrics

### **Expected Improvements**

- **Response Time**: 60-80% reduction for complex prompts
- **Memory Usage**: 50-70% reduction in context size
- **Reliability**: 95%+ success rate with fallbacks
- **User Experience**: Consistent response times

### **Monitoring Commands**

```bash
/performance    # Real-time performance metrics
/status         # System status and memory info
/memory         # Memory statistics
/models         # Current model configuration
```

## 🔮 Future Enhancements

### **Planned Improvements**

1. **Streaming Responses**: Real-time response streaming
2. **Predictive Pruning**: ML-based importance scoring
3. **Context Caching**: Intelligent context reuse
4. **Model Load Balancing**: Dynamic model selection
5. **Performance Analytics**: Historical performance tracking

### **Advanced Features**

- **Adaptive Timeouts**: Dynamic timeout adjustment based on prompt complexity
- **Context Templates**: Pre-built context templates for common scenarios
- **Memory Compression**: Advanced compression algorithms for context
- **Performance Profiling**: Detailed performance analysis tools

## 🛠️ Troubleshooting

### **Common Issues**

**Slow Responses**:
- Check `/performance` for metrics
- Verify model availability with `/models`
- Consider reducing context size

**Memory Issues**:
- Monitor memory health with `/performance`
- Clear history with `/clear` if needed
- Check for memory leaks

**Model Failures**:
- Verify Ollama is running
- Check model availability
- Review timeout settings

### **Debug Commands**

```bash
/performance    # Performance diagnostics
/status         # System health check
/memory         # Memory usage analysis
/models         # Model configuration
```

This optimization system ensures Chatty remains responsive and reliable even during the most complex and emotionally deep conversations, while maintaining the quality and depth of responses that users expect.
